# Introduction

## Alexander Neckam’s Reception in Modern Scholarship

Alexander Neckam (1157–1217) does not fit neatly into any of the categories typically assigned to authors of the past – it would be both too much and too little to say that he was a theologian, philosopher, or poet. The only label that has stuck has been that of ‘polymath’. This is accurate enough insofar as it captures the range of his interests, but it has also set scholars up for disappointment who set out reading Alexander expecting a great innovator, perhaps a thirteenth-century Leonardo da Vinci, only to be faced with his slow-moving, classicizing prose. Yet his writings and contemporary documentation reveal a teacher, Augustinian canon, and abbot who was indefatigably optimistic, tolerant, and open-minded seeking to write books that would meet the needs of his audiences. It is this historical Alexander that I hope will shine through in this analysis of his biblical commentaries written at Cirencester abbey and the manuscripts preserving his works.

The story of Alexander’s life is already well documented [for a summary of the most recent findings on Alexander‘s life, see the introduction to @hochgürtel:2008suppletio, pp. ix–xvi]. The earliest biography and listing of his works was compiled by the sixteenth-century antiquarian John Leland, who opines, ‘Alexander Necham demands a truly honourable place among the writers of his age’ [@leland:2010uiris, ch. 218 (408–9): ‘Alexander Nechamus inter suae aetatis scriptores locum poscit plane honorificum’]. Even for Leland, with his tendency to idolize every English author he describes, this is high praise; it seems reflect a generally high opinion of Alexander among medieval authors.

It is, therefore, rather curious that Alexander’s most significant works are almost wholly unknown. This is largely due to the accidents of the history of modern scholarship. One might compare Alexander’s fate to that of his contemporary Matthew Paris, the Benedictine historiographer (*c.* 1200–1259). His work survives in only a handful of copies, and his historiography seems to have been composed with little more than local usage in mind [@vaughan:1958matthew; cf. @weiler:2009matthew]. As fate would have it, however, after the dissolution of the English monasteries, the most significant manuscripts came into the hands of Matthew Parker (1504–75), archbishop of Canterbury and bibliophile, who published some of their contents beginning in 1567 [@vaughan:1958matthew, p. 154]. Most of Matthew’s works were subsequently published in *Rerum britannicarum medii aevi scriptores*, otherwise known as the Rolls Series. The broad availability of editions of Matthew’s works turned books that were almost totally unknown in their own time into works that are cited among the major literary works of medieval England.

Alexander has not had such good luck in modern publication. None of his works reached the printing press until the nineteenth-century craze for the study of folklore resulted in the publication of his *Nouus Esopus* and *Nouus Auianus* in 1854, as part of a collection of other material relating to the history of fables [@méril:1854poésies, pp. 169–213 (*NE*), 260–67 (*NA*)]. *Nouus Auianus* was published again within eight years, presumably without the editor being aware of the earlier effort [@neckam:1862nouus; the modern editions are @garbugino:1987novus; @klein:1998nouus]. These editions, however, reflect no interest in the author himself, which did not appear in any form until Thomas Wright’s *De naturis rerum* [@wright:1863naturis]. Wright was generally interested in the remains of Anglo-Latin literature, and has been both praised for his interests and cursed for his misconceptions [@rigg:1992history, p. xv]. In the case of *De naturis rerum,* his choice of manuscripts was unfortunate, for which he can be forgiven; his made a serious error, however, in publishing only the first two of the work’s five books as a ‘manual of scientific knowledge of the time’, arguing that the last three books form ‘simply a commentary on the book of Ecclesiastes, which has no direct connexion with that which precedes.’[@wright:1863naturis, p. xiv] This leaves readers with a rather skewed view of the work, hiding Alexander’s true purpose in writing it, namely to reveal the moral dimensions of the natural world [@wedge:1967alexander; @záhora:2014nature]. The reaction of contemporary reviewers is predictable. The *Times* called it ‘a bunch of antiquarian sea-weed … a medley of crystal and rubbish’ [@lucas:1864works, p. 172]. The *Dublin Review* took issue with Wright’s framing of the work, arguing, ‘Neckam’s object was not science, but devotion; and the facts of natural history are with him but the points of his meditation, or the texts of his sermon.’ ‘Want of sympathy with the author is a sore drawback in an editor; and Mr. Wright has none with Neckam, none with his peculiar learning, none with his moralities, which to him seem “far-fetched”.’ [@wiseman:1864naturis, pp. 495–96] Overall, the book appears to have been seen as a worthy if unusual addition to the Rolls Series [@anonymous:1864alexander; @neckam:1864naturis]. Despite its faults, the edition did more than any previous effort (and probably any since) to promote the study of Alexander’s works. It prompted a number of articles observing aspects of Alexander’s contribution to the history of science, interesting for their presentation of the material in the context of another discipline, though few offer new findings in terms of Alexander or his writings, and many are misled by Wright in understanding the work’s purpose [see for example @f:1896mediaeval; @larson:1913scientific; @weiss:1927alexander; @lippmann:1935vier; @gaselee:1935natural; @raven:1947english, pp. 4–8, 14–20; @milliman:2012ludus, pp. 74–75]. Because of *De naturis rerum,* and especially because he seems to have been the first European writer to mention the compass [@smith:1992precursors, pp. 12–18; @smith:1970peter, pp. A12–A14; @may:1955alexander; @bromehead:1944alexander], Alexander has most widely known as an early scientist. There is far more to him than this, and indeed it could be argued that his most impressive work lies in other areas.

Scholarly attention in the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth otherwise was primarily directed towards Alexander’s teaching works (*De nominibus utensilium* [@scheler:1866trois; @wright:1857treatise], *Corrogationes Promethei* [@meyer:1896notice], and *Sacerdos ad altare* [@haskins:1909list; revised in @haskins:1927list]) and the evidence for his scientific knowledge. Most significantly, a compilation of the listings of Alexander’s works made by the various early-modern bibliographers was eventually made, matching up their identifications with surviving manuscripts [@esposito:1915some; this article gave rise to @iver:1919scholarship, which condemns with amusing indignation ‘the English’ for neglecting to publish more of Alexander’s works].

A great leap forward in the modern knowledge of Alexander’s life and works was finally made by R.W. Hunt with his doctoral thesis, *Alexander Neckam* [@hunt:1936alexander]. Unfortunately, though it apparently became one of the most commonly consulted theses in the Bodleian Library, he never published it; this only occurred in 1984, after his death, when it was lightly edited by Margaret Gibson as *The Schools and the Cloister: The Life and Writings of Alexander Nequam* (*1157–1217*). This has a chilling effect on scholarship: the existence of the thesis was widely known and its publication expected at any time, stopping most scholars from producing any in-depth research on the subject. Between 1936 and 1984, only seventeen pieces of writing (thirteen articles, three theses, one book) appeared directly concerning Alexander, and most of these were based only on *De naturis rerum* or perhaps one or two other works.

Why did Hunt delay to make his findings public? The preface to the published version of the book by the Oxford biblical scholar Beryl Smalley is coy, implying that Hunt was simply a perfectionist, and noting that his work at the Bodleian prevented him from ever taking the matter of publication seriously [Beryl Smalley, preface to @hunt:1984schools, pp. vii–viii]. What Smalley does not mention is that Hunt had actually made plans to publish his thesis. The lightly edited and annotated copy of Hunt’s thesis that Smalley describes in her preface as having been used for revision by Margaret Gibson is now preserved in the Bodleian among many other notes from Hunt’s research on Alexander. Loose in the front cover is a letter from Smalley herself, dated 13 July 1960 at St Hilda’s College, Oxford:

> Print this just as it is with the strictly necessary additions and revisions! It reads well as it is. I only suggest preparing or adding an account of A.N.’s significance. He strikes me now, fresh from looking at Chatillon’s *Libri exceptionum,* as marking the very end of the Victorine tradition with the whole trunk bursting open and scattering its contents over the railway station. Does any scholar of the turn of the century sum up so many divergent trends as A.N.? He’s both secular scholar and monk or rather canon. The next generation would produce an encyclopedia as such, not all mixed up with a commentary. He seems to have been the last of the great non-specialists except for Grosseteste and even he’s less all-round because he kept no equivalent of the monastic commentaries.^[Inserted loose at the front of the revised copy of Hunt’s thesis, *Alexander Neckam,* by this time called *Alexander Nequam.* (The title *The Schools and the Cloister* seems to have come from Gibson’s revision.) This is contained in Oxford, Bodleian Library, Hunt 102: a box which also includes Hunt’s annotated copy of *De naturis rerum.* Hunt 101 and Hunt 103 also contain miscellaneous notes from Hunt’s research on Alexander.]

Smalley goes on to make a few ‘small points’ on areas of improvement. Hers is essentially the scheme that was eventually carried out, but only after more than twenty years had passed. Also surviving is a letter from the Clarendon Press, dated 26 July 1960. They accepted the book for publication, stipulating only that some minor changes should be made.^[Also found in Hunt 102. ‘As we agreed last week, I am now returning your typescript, on the understanding that you are going to truncate it somewhere about page 200 and let us have it back as quickly as you can for publication.’ The remainder of the note lists the publisher’s terms. The agent (the signature on the letter is illegible) is asking Hunt to remove the second part of his thesis, which consists of extracts concerning Alexander’s life and from his writings; this is the primarily difference with the published version of the study. Much of this material is integrated into the footnotes of *The Schools and the Cloister.*] Hunt, however, evidently felt that this was not enough.

The eventual publication of *The Schools and the Cloister* was thus something of an unusual affair, and the result is a curious amalgam of the cutting edge of the 1930s and citations of more recent work, as reviewers pointed out [@rigg:1986schools being the most thorough]. Nonetheless, the book has brought about an explosion of scholarship (in relative terms) on Alexander. This has resulted, most usefully, in editions of several more of his works, making most of his minor writings available. Studies have generally focused on establishing the canon of his works [@mcdonough:2008alexander; @mcdonough:2005cambridge; @mcdonough:2004laus; @damon:1957note], on understanding his classroom textbooks and his approach to language [@copeland:2010naming; @wolff:1974alexandre], and his mythography [@núñez:2005fábula; @bisanti:2005fior; @bisanti:2002novus; @klein:2000nouus].

What we still lack is basic information on Alexander’s large-scale commentaries on Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, the Song of Songs, the *Mulierem fortem* passage found at Proverbs 31:10–31, and the Athanasian Creed. Hunt’s chapter on Alexander as commentator is, at present, the primary source of information for most of these works. None has its full text available in any form beyond the manuscripts.

Nothing at all since Hunt has been written concerning the commentaries on either the Athanasian Creed or the Psalms. Hunt distinguishes these as being of a ‘scholastic type’, probably deriving from Alexander’s teaching days at Oxford [@hunt:1985schools, p. 95]. The remainder he defines as ‘monastic’. Of these, only the first two books of *De naturis rerum* have been published by Wright, as described above, and none of the commentary proper on Ecclesiastes. This book has been the subject of two doctoral dissertations, one of which has recently been published [@wedge:1967alexander; @záhora:2007tropological; @záhora:2014nature; @záhora:2014nature]. Záhora has also focused on the relationship between *De naturis rerum* and the *Solatium fidelis anime* [@záhora:2011tropology], and McDonough has noted some of the differences between *De naturis rerum* and the *Suppletio defectuum* [@mcdonough:2001alexander]. He considers Alexander primarily within the encyclopedic tradition, a track that had been followed before by a number of other scholars [@schuler:2000fabrica; @schuler:2002rives; @voorbij:2000purpose; @berlioz:1994recueils; @quantin:1966petites]. Nothing of substance has been written on the commentary on Proverbs, though it has been used in assessing Alexander’s approach to law [@záhora:2013attendant; see also @kantorowicz:1937medieval]. On the commentary on the Song of Songs, two articles have done much to place the book among others of its genre [@fulton:1996mimetic; @holdsworth:1996two], and McDonough made the important discovery that it is the same work as the *Laus beatissime uirginis* cited in various places [@mcdonough:2004laus]. A dissertation presenting the text of the first book of the *Tractatus super mulierem fortem* has also been produced; it says little of substance concerning the work, though its edition, despite many flaws, has been of service [@mahoney:1971critical]. It has also been noted in general that Alexander seems to have had some knowledge of Hebrew [@loewe:1966hebrew; @loewe:1958alexander].

The second field that Hunt left almost entirely open is (perhaps oddly for a future Keeper of Western Manuscripts at the Bodleian Library) the codicological evidence for Alexander’s work. Hunt appears to have examined nearly all the manuscripts containing Alexander’s works, but did not have the time to do more than list their contents. There seems, however, to be something oddly coherent about the manuscripts; I argue that this is a direct result of their exemplars’ origin at Cirencester. Wright observed in his edition of *De naturis rerum* that there was a pattern of consistent marginal titles in his manuscripts, suggesting that they were part of the original [Wright, introduction to @wright:1863naturis, p. lxxvii]. Hunt guessed that part of Oxford, Jesus College 94 actually preserves the author’s handwriting, a suggestion later amplified by Michael Gullick [@hunt:1954schools, pp. 30–31; @gullick:1990twelfth, pp. 21–23]. To date, however, nobody has attempted to see what this might imply for the composition of Alexander’s works, nor have the linked the surviving books with practices at Cirencester or the needs of the Augustinian order.

Scholarship on Alexander Neckam has now brought us to the point at which we probably know about as much as we ever will when it comes to the basic facts of his life and what he wrote. We do not, however, know the contents of all his works in detail, how they relate to other medieval writings, or how his contemporaries used them. As Beryl Smalley noted more than half a century ago in her letter to Hunt, almost nothing has been said about Neckam’s significance. As can be seen from this review of current scholarship, Hunt’s book *The Schools and the Cloisters* has had the effect of compartmentalizing Alexander and his writings: first into scholastic and monastic contexts, and secondly a string of activities, as indicated by the titles of Hunt’s chapters – as he sees him, Alexander was a grammarian, versifier and stylist, scientist, preacher, commentator, and theologian. This study is an attempt to reconsider Alexander primarily within his historical role as a canon and abbot in the Augustinian order, using the only artefacts we have from his life, namely the manuscripts that preserve his writings.

## Scope of the Present Study

If Alexander’s books seem dull to modern readers, it is probably because we are not his target audience. This study argues that the commentaries written by Alexander Neckam during his time at Cirencester, though they seem on the surface to were essentially written for the Augustinian community at Cirencester, and that as canon and later abbot he composed works that would fill a lack of practical books that served as tools for the order’s work in its community. The evidence for this is derived primarily from an analysis of the manuscripts containing Alexander’s works, a number of which appear to be derived directly from copies made at Cirencester.

### The Use and Creation of Books at Cirencester

Everyone knows that Alexander was an Augustinian canon. But who were these people, and what did they do? This was an immensely practical group of people, and medieval Cirencester was a market town where there was no end of work for them. Alexander, as a teacher, would have fit in very well with such a group, and indeed can be seen as one of the most eminent of contemporary Augustinians, if one considers what was likely expected of the average canon. Books were among the most important resources of such a community.

To judge from surviving volumes, Cirencester had a rich tradition of making books, and seems to have developed something of a house style, with a peculiarly beautiful method of creating decorated initials. Almost all the books at Cirencester from before Alexander’s time, however, were copies of patristic works, as were common at Augustinian houses. One can also get some idea of the books Alexander had access to through citations in his writings, though it is not altogether clear whether he consulted them at Cirencester or elsewhere.

Alexander benefited from the patristic reading available to him, as can be seen from his many citations of this material, but may have desired something more current and direct. During his time at Paris, Alexander was inspired by the work of authors such as his teacher William de Montibus to bring the latest in scholastic theology to bear on practical pastoral matters. When he came to Cirencester, he was probably shocked to find that he had no such tools to accomplish what he saw as his work there. Alexander’s writings, however, would have represented something quite new to the canons: works that they could use in everyday life.

### *Speculum animi mei:* The Wisdom Commentaries

Alexander’s commentaries on the biblical wisdom books – Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Song of Songs – fit together very well stylistically, and can be seen as something of a series. They certainly represent both his most voluminous work, but have rarely been examined in any detail. What one finds on closer examination is a collection that responds to themes that were quite popular at the time, and indeed that Alexander’s fellow-canons probably demanded to hear about.

These works probably took their original form as oral addresses, later revised for formal recording in a manuscript. On this point, it is very helpful to compare the sermons on the Song of Songs by Bernard of Clairvaux, whose precise method delivery has long been a matter of contention; it is not altogether clear whether these in fact given as sermons in chapter, or whether they were a strictly literary exercise. Alexander’s works contribute to the question by adding an organizational scheme that is evidently designed to allow the book to be used as a reference tool.

To distinguish them from Alexander’s other commentaries, these have been categorized as ‘monastic’, and on a certain level this is an appropriate designation, in terms of following in a ruminative pattern akin to that of, for instance, Rupert of Deutz, or the more contemporary commentary on Lamentations by William of Malmesbury. The meditation on Mary Magdalene and *Solatium fidelis anime* are also included in this category. What is striking about Alexander’s commentaries is their personal nature. The *Tractatus super Mulierem fortem* appears to be a series of addresses given by Alexander as abbot to his fellow canons; but at the end of this work, he refers to it as *speculum animi mei* – the mirror of his soul. What is the meaning of this, and what function would this have served within his community?

### The Audience of Alexander’s Scholastic Works

Alexander’s commentaries the Athanasian Creed and the Psalms, along with his *Corrogationes Promethei,* *Sacerdos ad altare,* and *Speculum speculationum* have been understood as works written for the schools. This chapter considers how many of the manuscripts for these works come from a monastic context, where their provenance can be identified. This stands in contrast to *De nominibus utensilium,* a work with a demonstrably early date. This chapter considers whether these works are stylistically different from Alexander’s ‘monastic’ works, and the extent to which they can also be considered as having been written primarily for the work of the Augustinian order.

### Composing at Cirencester: Alexander’s Handwriting and Methods of Revision

Alexander makes a number of interesting remarks about the production of books in his *De nominibus utensilium* and *Sacerdos ad altare.* This chapter considers whether these shed any light on Alexander’s writing process, particularly in the context of manuscripts that contain examples of Alexander’s own handwriting. This was first identified by R.W. Hunt in revisions to the commentary on the Psalms; his hypothesis is here verified and extended. The hand in Oxford, Jesus College 94 can be almost certainly be understood as belonging to Alexander because the corrections it makes are found (in a slightly different form) in London, British Library, Royal 2 C. XI. The hand is also identified as occurring in several other manuscripts, certainly in the case of a few other copies of Alexander’s works, and less so in annotations from several Cirencester manuscripts. The revisions made by this hand are compared to similar cases from this period.

### Beyond Cirencester: Copying and Disseminating Alexander’s Books

The canons at Cirencester evidently had a broad interest in the intellectual products of scholasticism. This chapter considers the broader audience for Alexander’s works in time and space; and how successive generations of scribes changed the texts in their own copies. In general, it appears that they kept features from their exemplar to a great extent, to the point that one can sometimes see echoes of the layout and decoration practices of Cirencester in their copies. Common owners of certain groups of manuscripts can be identified. Finally, we consider the florilegium of Alexander’s works, now Cambridge, University Library, Gg. 6.42, perhaps one of the most pertinent memorials to the abbot, and an attempt to make a new practical tool out of his works within a monastic context.

---

It is true that most of the works of Alexander Neckam are not immediately appealing to modern readers, and this has led many to dismiss him (and many of his contemporaries) as irrelevant. As this study should show, this is not quite fair. We are dealing an author who was closely attuned to the needs of his audience, creating a series of writings that in their day provided a ready source of information for their readers. Even if our own textbooks, sermons, and devotional works should survive eight centuries from now, little of it will be of interest in the future. A modern if not quite accurate comparison might be the software written by programmers: it is eminently useful and even critical in its own day, but passes away quickly. Yet nobody would say that we should therefore stop writing textbooks, or that programmers following set forms cannot be innovative. Similarly, given further historical context, we find that Alexander Neckam’s books are not the self-indulgent rants that we might first perceive them, but practical tools to serve the needs of an order whose work made little distinction between school and cloister.
